docs(reset-and-upgrade): add Block Node reset and upgrade guide for Kubernetes deployments (#2874)
hiero-ledger/hiero-block-node: docs/block-node/operations/resetting-and-upgrading-the-block-node.md

# Resetting and Upgrading the Block Node

This guide explains when to reset or upgrade a deployed Block Node, why each operation matters, and how to perform both safely on a Kubernetes deployment.

It assumes the Block Node was installed using the standard Helm chart, either via the [Manual Single-Node Kubernetes Deployment](./single-node-k8s-deployment.md) guide or the [Solo Provisioner Single-Node Kubernetes Deployment](./solo-weaver-single-node-k8s-deployment.md) guide.

## Overview

Reset and upgrade are two distinct day-two operations that are often confused:

- **Upgrade** changes the running Block Node version (image tag and Helm chart version) without discarding the local block storage or state. Pre-existing live and historic blocks remain on disk; the new version resumes from where the previous one left off.

> - **Reset** wipes the Block Node's local block data — both live blocks and historic blocks — and starts the node fresh. A reset is destructive; the wiped blocks cannot be recovered locally and must be re-ingested from upstream Consensus Nodes or backfilled from another Block Node.

Reviewer: Blocks cannot be re-ingested (unless the reset only covers the last 2 minutes, which is, practically, irrelevant) from CN.

We should add a warning that backfill for a mature network (e.g. Hedera mainnet) can take a very long time (weeks), depending on the total size of history for that network.

> The two operations can be chained: `task reset-upgrade` resets the local data store and moves to a new version in a single command. Use this when you need to discard data and move forward; use `task helm-upgrade` alone for a clean version bump.

Reviewer: Perhaps note here that production block nodes should, as a practical consideration, never be reset under normal circumstances.

- A populated `.env` file in the Taskfile directory with at minimum:
  - `RELEASE` - Helm release name used at install time.
  - `NAMESPACE` - Kubernetes namespace the Block Node was installed into.
  - `VERSION` - the chart version (and image appVersion) to upgrade to.
  - `POD` - Block Node pod name (only needed for `reset-file-store` / `reset-upgrade`).
- A maintenance window if the Block Node is serving downstream Mirror Nodes or other subscribers. Upgrade restarts the pod and briefly interrupts subscribe streams; reset additionally interrupts ingestion until the new pod re-establishes its publisher connection.

## When and why to upgrade

Upgrade the Block Node when any of the following is true:

- A new Block Node release contains fixes or features you need - security, correctness, plugin behaviour, or compatibility with a newer Hiero network release. Track releases at [hiero-block-node releases](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-block-node/releases).

> - A new HAPI / Consensus Node version is rolled out and the running Block Node version is no longer compatible with the block stream format it publishes.

Reviewer: This should almost never happen.

- The Helm chart shape has changed - for example, new required values, renamed configuration keys, or added persistent volume mounts. The chart and the Block Node image versions are released together and share an `appVersion`.

> - You are progressing through the records-to-block-streams cutover and need a Block Node version that supports a specific cutover stage. Refer to [Cutover-Process](../Cutover-Process.md) for milestone-by-milestone version requirements.

Reviewer: One version of block node _should_ support all stages (assuming we finish the required features in time).

**Why it matters:** An upgrade preserves local block data and state, so the Block Node continues to serve historical block-range requests immediately after the new pod becomes ready. There is no backfill window unless the upgrade itself fails.

## When and why to reset

Reset the Block Node only when there is a concrete reason to discard local data. Acceptable reasons:

> - **Corrupt or inconsistent on-disk state** - the pod fails to start, repeatedly crashes after reading existing data, or `serverStatus` returns block-range values that disagree with the upstream Consensus Node's view of network history.

Reviewer: Consensus Nodes do not know the network history.
More likely would be disagreement with the Mirror Node or _other block nodes_.

- **Switching networks** - moving an existing Block Node deployment from one network (for example `previewnet`) to another (for example `testnet`). The block numbering and address book differ across networks; the existing data will not be valid for the new network. Reset is required, not optional.

> - **Recovery from a bad version** - rolling back from an upgrade that wrote incompatible data to disk and there is no forward-compatible release available.

Reviewer: I certainly hope this never happens in testnet or later; it would represent a major failure of process.

- **Cleaning a dev or test deployment** before reusing the cluster for a fresh integration run.

> **Why it matters:** Reset is destructive. The Block Node wipes its live and historic block stores on disk and restarts; the pod will report an empty range (`firstAvailableBlock = lastAvailableBlock = uint64_max`) and must re-ingest blocks from a Consensus Node or backfill from a Tier 1 Block Node. Mirror Nodes pointed at the reset Block Node will see `NOT_AVAILABLE` until enough blocks have been ingested or backfilled to satisfy their `start_block_number`.

Reviewer: Repeating this here, you cannot re-ingest from Consensus.  Consensus has _no_ history beyond a minimal buffer.

> > **Caution:** Reset cannot be undone from inside the Block Node. If you need a recoverable snapshot of the data before resetting, copy the contents of the live and archive PVCs to off-cluster storage first.

Reviewer: Somewhere we should recommend that high value block nodes maintain an offline backup of this data as a general practice; updated daily if possible.

If the upgrade returned cleanly but the new version turned out to be unhealthy in steady state, follow the path below that matches your deployment.

#### Path A: Solo Provisioner-managed deployments

The Solo Provisioner **rejects in-place chart-version downgrade**. Running `solo-provisioner block node upgrade --chart-version <lower>` returns:

> `block node chart version cannot be downgraded from X to Y; version downgrade is not supported.`

**Do not run `helm rollback` or `helm upgrade --version <lower>` directly against a Solo Provisioner-managed release.** The Provisioner keeps its own record of the deployed chart version in a state file. A direct Helm call changes the cluster but not the state file, so the next `solo-provisioner` command operates on a stale view. Likely symptoms: legitimate upgrades refused, migrations that should re-run are skipped, values rendered for the wrong version. Reconciling the state file with the cluster afterwards is manual.

The supported procedure is uninstall and reinstall of the previous version:

```bash
sudo solo-provisioner block node uninstall
sudo solo-provisioner block node install -p <profile>
```

> `solo-provisioner block node uninstall` deletes the StatefulSet but leaves the PVs and PVCs intact. A Long-Form-History (LFH) Block Node retains its data on disk, so the subsequent reinstall does not trigger a full backfill. Ensure the Provisioner is configured to install the previous chart version (consult the Solo Provisioner documentation for the version-selection flag or state-file format used by your release).

Reviewer: There is no "Long-Form-History", the term is "Local Full History".
```suggestion
`solo-provisioner block node uninstall` deletes the StatefulSet but leaves the PVs and PVCs intact. A Local Full History (LFH) Block Node retains its data on disk, so the subsequent reinstall does not trigger a full backfill. Ensure the Provisioner is configured to install the previous chart version (consult the Solo Provisioner documentation for the version-selection flag or state-file format used by your release).
```

helm history "$RELEASE" -n "$NAMESPACE"
helm rollback "$RELEASE" <previous-revision> -n "$NAMESPACE"
```

The Helm release manifest reverts to the named revision. The PVCs are untouched, so existing block data remains available to the rolled-back pod.

> **Caveat - migrations are forward-only.** `helm rollback` reverts the Helm release manifest only. Side effects that the higher version introduced — new PVCs, modified StatefulSet shape, ConfigMap changes — are not reversed. If the upgrade between the two revisions crossed a migration boundary, the rolled-back deployment may end up inconsistent (chart says version N, the disk and resource layout say version N+1). In that case, treat the situation as a full reset: `task clear-release` followed by `task helm-release` with `VERSION` set to the previous chart version. This drops block data, so confirm that's acceptable before proceeding.

## Resetting the Block Node

There are two reset paths, depending on whether you also want to bump the version.

### Path A: Reset on the same version

Use this when the on-disk data is corrupt and you simply want to start the current version with a clean store.

```bash
task reset-file-store
```

> This execs into the pod, removes everything under `/opt/hiero/block-node/data/live/` and `/opt/hiero/block-node/data/historic/`, and then deletes the pod. The StatefulSet recreates the pod and the new pod starts with empty data directories. PVCs are preserved (the data is wiped inside the PVC, not by destroying the PVC).

Reviewer: We might want to not be specific about paths.
Each plugin has it's own path, and not all block nodes have the paths listed.

# Resetting and Upgrading the Block Node

This guide explains when to reset or upgrade a deployed Block Node, why each operation matters, and how to perform both safely on a Kubernetes deployment.

It assumes the Block Node was installed using the standard Helm chart, either via the [Manual Single-Node Kubernetes Deployment](./single-node-k8s-deployment.md) guide or the [Solo Provisioner Single-Node Kubernetes Deployment](./solo-weaver-single-node-k8s-deployment.md) guide.

## Overview

Reset and upgrade are two distinct day-two operations that are often confused:

- **Upgrade** changes the running Block Node version (image tag and Helm chart version) without discarding the local block storage or state. Pre-existing live and historic blocks remain on disk; the new version resumes from where the previous one left off.

> - **Reset** wipes the Block Node's local block data — both live blocks and historic blocks — and starts the node fresh. A reset is destructive: Consensus Nodes only keep a minimal recent buffer and cannot serve the wiped history, so the lost data must be backfilled from another Block Node that holds the relevant range (typically a Tier 1 archive node). For a mature network — Hedera mainnet, for example — that backfill can take a very long time (potentially weeks), proportional to the total block history.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Reset** wipes the Block Node's local block data (both live blocks and historic blocks), clears the node application state details (e.g. rosters) and  starts the node fresh. A reset is destructive: Consensus Nodes only keep a minimal recent buffer and cannot serve the wiped history, so the lost data must be backfilled from another Block Node that holds the relevant range (typically a Tier 1 archive node). For a mature network — Hedera mainnet, for example — that backfill can take a very long time (potentially weeks), proportional to the total block history.
```

Reviewer: applicate ==> application

> The two operations can be chained: `task reset-upgrade` resets the local data store and moves to a new version in a single command. Use this when you need to discard data and move forward; use `task helm-upgrade` alone for a clean version bump.

Reviewer 2: This is good but please highlight provisioner here also i.e. use solo provisioner x / task y
We want to push provisioners use even though we need to support non-provisioner usage :)
